tion.
 3.: Guanyl-cyclase generates cGMP (cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate) that activates PK-G (Protein kinase-G) and the consequent kinase cascade acts similarly as above.
 4.: Phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase-C (PI-PLC) cleaves phosphatidyl-inositol 4,5-bis-phosphate (PIP2) from the membrane into 3,4,5 inositol-triphosphate (IP3) + diacylglycerol (DAG). DAG activates protein-kinase-C (PK-C), which is responsible for protein phosphorylations in the cell The IP3 getting into the cytoplasm releases Ca++ from the endoplasmic reticulum, which (together with the Ca++ flown in from the EC space) binds to calmodulin this (Ca++)4-calmodulin complex (CaM) activates calmodulin-sensitive kinases (CaM-kinases) that mediate the reaction in target cells: e.g. stimulate hormone secretion in hormone-producing target cells, or act on cell migration/proliferation.
 The signal generated by hormone binding to G-protein associated receptors fades when the GTP bound to the G-protein is cleaved to GDP P by the GTP-ase activity of this protein.
 In case of the transmembrane receptors for insulin or for growth factors hormone binding activates the intracellular tyrosine kinase part that phosphorylates various substrates after itself being auto-phosphorylated and dimerized. These substrates are often Ser/Thr kinases that mediate phosphorylation of further proteins.
 Receptor sensitization desensitization, as well as up- and down regulation of their numbers, or previous/simultaneous alternate hormonal actions exerted on a given cell might alter signal transduction pathways hence the outcomes at distinct times will be distinct responses of the same cell  both in strength and modality  even if the hormone exposure is the same.
 The hormone-receptor binding takes place within the cell in case of members of the steroid-thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. These hormones are lipophilic hence permeate the plasma membrane. Retinoid receptors (RAR & RXR) and vitamin D receptors (VDR) also belong to this receptor superfamily. The hormone-receptor complex exerts its action after translocating into the nucleus (e.g.: glucocorticoids), or the hormone-binding happens directly within the nucleus (e.g.: thyroid hormones). These receptors directly influence the gene transcription from DNA into mRNA, hence they are called ligand-induced transcription factors. The genes for proteins expressed (translated) upon hormone action are the target genes of the given hormone. Members of the steroid-thyroid hormone receptor superfamily bind to the DNA via their double zinc-finger structures that are loops of the peptide chain stabilized by four Cys amino-acids chelating a zinc ion. Activated upon hormone binding the receptors dimerize and specifically bind to designated tandem repeat sequences (the steroid response element: SRE) of the DNA in the promoter region of their target genes. Some receptors preferentially form homodimers (e.g.: glucocorticoids), while others rather form heterodimers (e.g.: thyroid receptors) where the typical partner is retinoid X receptor: RXR.
 The fact that peptide and amine hormone receptors reside on the cell surface does not imply, that their activation could not affect gene expression in the target cells. The kinase cascade initiated upon activation of these receptors eventually able to activate transcription factors via phosphorylating them. The pituitary trophormones exert their trophic effect on the peripheral target glands through phosphorylation of the cAMP Response Element Binding protein (CREB), a transcription factor that promotes expression of genes mediating hypertrophy of the glandular tissue. Steroid hormones, on the other hand, might also elicit immediate or quick cellular responses that are independent from gene transcription; e.g.: changes of the membrane potential or quick restructuring of the cytoskeleton. These effects are mediated in part by membrane receptors often featuring ligand binding domains homologous to the nuclear steroid receptors or in part by binding proteins of distinct structure. (A well-known example is the effect of progesterone on the GABA receptors.)
PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL ATTRIBUTES OF HORMONE RECEPTORS
 It is understood that a hormone action may be insufficient despite normal hormone levels, if the receptors are injured (e.g. ADH receptor: renal diabetes insipidus, insulin receptor: insulin-resistance, VDR: vitamin-D resistant rickets), or antagonists are bound to them (e.g. binding immune antibodies, false transmitters in hepatic failure). In the opposite way: an enhanced receptor-sensitivity may result in increased hormone action even if the hormone levels are normal. The biological action also depends on the tissue responsiveness: e.g. in histotoxic hypoxia the hormone-effects in the tissues are low, despite normal hormone-quantities/activities and receptor-sensitivities.
 The hormone release may be continuous or pulsatile. After an initial stimulation, a continuous GnRH (gonadotr