levated from 5% up to 50% (hepatic steatosis). The most obvious cause of this is the lowered production of protein synthesis, and the production of small amounts of abnormal apoproteins. In the blood, cholesterol-rich abnormal lipoproteins appear (e.g. LPX in biliary congestion), which incorporate into the membrane of red blood cells, thereby decreasing their membrane resistance and causing a tendency for hemolysis. Levels of plasma lipoproteins are elevated, and type-III hyperlipoproteinemia is characteristic. The only regulated method to eliminate cholesterol is through the liver, however, this is disrupted in liver damage. Transformation of cholesterol to bile acids (cholic acid, chenodeoxycholic acid), conjugation with taurine/glycine may be disrupted, or excretion of bile acids may be low, thereby the only regulated way of cholesterol elimination becomes insufficient. 
7.6.1.2. METABOLISM AND STORAGE OF VITAMINS 
 Primarily, the fat-soluble vitamins A and D, together with the water-soluble folic acid and vitamin B12 are possessed in greater quantities in the hepatic storage. Regarding the release of vitamin A, the liver must also produce a transport protein (retinol binding protein, ch. A6.2.4.1.), since, without this, the vitamin accumulates within the cells and thereby induces cell injury. The Ito-cells which store vitamin A, have a central role in the development of cirrhosis (ch. 7.6.1.7.). In reference to the role of hepatic 25-hydroxylase enzyme, liver function is also required for producing the active form of vitamin D. The most important function in which vitamin K plays an important role is in the effective production of coagulation factors within the liver. Although vitamin K has no hepatic storage, its action requires the existence of intact hepatocytes. 
7.6.1.3. DETOXIFICATION IN THE LIVER 
 Most fat-soluble substances and waste products are eliminated by the liver. They enter the hepatic cells through passive transport. Within the cell, they first bind to Y and Z proteins (ligands), and then are metabolized with the aid of cytochrome P-450, and conjugated by taurine or glycine, to become water-soluble. Although the metabolites may eventually have higher toxic actions when compared to the original substance, the conjugated form can be quickly emptied into the intestine through active biliary excretion. In the case of water-soluble substances, the hepatic detoxification does not necessitate conjugation, thus, their metabolites can be excreted partly by the bile, or in a smaller extent, they re-enter the circulation to be renally excreted. 
 Disorders of hepatic detoxification may originate from disturbances of hepatic circulation, from abnormalities of blood-to-hepatocyte transport, from disorders of IC metabolization, or from too slow excretion. In the case of slow detoxification, the toxins and their metabolites are present in the hepatocytes for a sustained period of time, thereby induce cellular injury, necrosis, and finally, cirrhosis. 
 The most important groups of substances to be detoxified and/or metabolized and excreted by the liver include the following: 1) ammonia, 2) alcohol, drugs, xenobiotic substances, which are in competition and mutually impede one anothers metabolism, and, 3) bilirubin and the bile acids. 
Detoxification of ammonia:
 Originating from the highly toxic ammonia, with the aid of CO2, the intact liver produces urea in the urea cycle (Fig. 5.15.). Urea is a water-soluble weak toxin and after being released from the liver to the circulation, it is excreted by filtration in the kidney. Ammonia appears in the circulation from various sources, including deamination of proteins, metabolism of renal glutamine, and mainly bacterial breakdown of proteins in the gut. In liver failure, detoxification by the urea pathway becomes ineffective, ammonia accumulates and its strong toxic effects appear primarily in the central nervous system and contribute to the development of hepatic encephalopathy. In portal hypertension (ch. 7.6.3.), the ammonia originating from the guts avoids the liver, and through shunt vessels it enters the systemic circulation, ultimately explaining the portal encephalopathy. 
Detoxification of alcohol:
 Alcohol is detoxified by its transformation in the liver. Any alcohol not transformed by this method will remain in the circulation to be removed through the kidney. 
 In plasma levels exceeding 50 mg/ml, the maximal hepatic ethanol metabolism is about 10 g/hour (supplying about 7 kcal/g), and the excess is removed by the urine. The alcohol, although it alone does not cover the daily energy need, in cases of otherwise sufficient nutrient supply it may serve as a substantial excess of calories (causing a form of obesity). Of course, this is not the case, if and when the nutritional intake is lower, as it is in most chronic alcoholics. 
 The ethanol ? acetaldehyde ? acetate transformation (and in competition with this, also the methanol ? formate transfo