10. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ENDOCRINE SYSTEMS
 By definition hormones are substances formed at certain parts of the bod (mostly these are the endocrine glands) and delivered by the bloodstream to their remote target sites where they exert their specific effects. They substantially influence the function of diverse organs or organ systems conducting their normal or pathologic operation. Distinct endocrine systems could be dissected (for didactic purposes) according to the hormones produced and their uttermost typical organ-effects, but most hormones actually exert a wide array of actions on the integrated and coordinated functioning of the whole body. Along this line endocrine anomalies alter the function of particular target organs (e.g.: sex-specific effects of gonadal hormones in reproduction) but also have systemic effects all over the body (e.g.: gonadal hormones modify atherosclerosis that leads to circulatory pathologies, or bone rebuilding that is essential in development of osteoporosis etc.)
10.1. PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL BASES OF ENDOCRINOLOGY
10.1.1. HORMONES AND THEIR WAYS OF ACTION 
 The mechanisms of hormonal action and the pathological alterations thereof could be investigated by focusing on the following targets:
1.: Synthesis and secretion of hormones with distinct structures and regulation thereof.
2.: Transport of hormones to the target cells and their metabolism/degradation
3.: Receptor functions (mechanisms of hormone-binding receptor activation, stimulated signal transduction pathways and their intracellular targets)
4.: Alterations of hormonal effects in pathologic conditions or along with treatments thereof and in special circumstances either of endocrine or of non-endocrine origin.
 In the classical endocrine actions, various hormones must enter the circulation. Here most of them are bound to transport proteins (e.g. albumin). The level of the transport protein might modulate the hormonal effect since the majority of a given hormone circulates in the bound form, but only the free hormone molecules exert their biological activities. These hormones may be metabolized into an inactive form either in the liver, the kidney or in the target organ. Instead of such a classical endocrine mechanism other hormones may act as neurocrine/transmitter (adrenaline, vasopressin, TRH), paracrine (acting on the surrounding cells-tissues, e.g. gastrin, CCK, somatostatin, histamine), or autocrine mediators (influencing their own hormone production, e.g. amylin produced in ?-cells together with insulin inhibits the production of insulin).
TYPES OF HORMONES
Peptide-hormones (e.g. insulin, glucagon, secretin, parathormone):
 These are generally produced by enzymatic cleavage from prohormones. They are stored partly as prohormones, partly in their final form in vesicles. Peptide hormones get into the circulation by exocytosis of the vesicles (may be preceded by proteolysis).
 The trophormones produced by the anterior lobe of the pituitary (e.g.: FSH, LH, TSH, ACTH) are peptides as well. Their target cells, however, are not in somatic tissues / organs, but in endocrine glands where these trophormones regulate hormone secretion of these peripheral glands. They also exert there trophic effects, hence their absence leads to atrophy of the glands. The gonadotrops (LH, FSH) and the thyreotrop hormone (TSH) are hetrodimeric glycoproteins with an identical alpha subunit also shared by hCG of placental origin. All four are members of the cystine knot -structure growth factor family, where among others VEGF, EGF and TGF-beta belong as well.
Steroid hormones (e.g. aldosterone, cortisol, sexual steroids):
 They are synthesized from cholesterol and have only little stores. They are secreted by passive diffusion. 
Amine hormones (e.g. catecholamines, serotonin, dopamine, thyroid hormones):
 Following their enzymatic synthesis, they are stored until utilization. Their way of action is similar as that of the peptide hormones (except thyroid hormones that act via receptors rather like the steroids).
HORMONE RECEPTORS AND THEIR FUNCTION
 The hormones exert their cellular actions by binding to special receptors on the cells of tissues / target organs. The most abundant group of the membrane receptors are the G-protein associated receptors where the activation (conformational change) elicited by hormone binding is transferred by GDP-GTP binding heterotrimeric G-proteins toward the effectors. G-proteins might either stimulate (Gs) or inhibit (Gi) the effectors.
 There is a multitude of effector molecules linked with these G-proteins that mediate hormonal effects intracellularly and these generate a variety of second messengers: 
 1.: Ion channels change the permeability of membrane toward certain ions letting them enter the intracellular space (e.g.: Ca++ channels).
 2.: Adenyl-cyclase generates cAMP (cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate) that activates PK-A (Protein kinase-A) and the consequent phosphorylation of proteins leads to the final ac